I'm like I reiterated things.
Tell him anything about it.
Transition to Scott Baum.
We also had the opportunity to talk to another acquaintance of Robert E. Howard, Mr. Scott Baum.
Nothing about Adam, his brother?
Let me get things cranked up here.
What are you going to ask me?
That makes no difference.
How long have you been living in Cross Plains?
I've been living in Cross Plains since 1922.
That's a while, isn't it?
I was a boy here.
I went to college and came back.
Took over the newspaper.
I got out of college one day and took over the newspaper.
I retired from the newspaper about eight or nine years ago.
When did you first meet Mr. Howard?
When did I first meet him?
Well, as a boy, I knew him here.
When he was a boy, Howard would be about four or five years old or nine.
Four years, I guess.
I guess he'd be about 70 years old.
Howard would be about 74 or five now, I think.
I could check that out for you, but possibly you got that information at hand.
When did you...
I knew him at...
I started to high school.
I came in here, moved here from a nearby town and entered high school as about a sophomore.
In those days, we only had ten grades here and they were not affiliated.
Howard went down to Brownwood to finish his high school work
in order to be qualified to enter college.
When you came back to Cross Plains after going to college and you started over the newspaper...
That was in July. I took over the newspaper in July 1930.
Howard was here at the time.
He was a young man, I was twenty years old and Howard must have been 24 or five.
He was writing for a bunch of pulp magazines, just getting started.
Very few people remember the names of those magazines, but it was Stone Street and Smith.
They published a number of magazines like Weird Tales.
Weird Tales was one of them, I believe, and Boxing and Wild West and a whole lot of stuff like that.
He mainly wrote for Weird Tales, but he also occasionally wrote for...
He's a ring or something. He occasionally wrote for Boxing magazine too.
Yeah, we were talking to Ms. Laughlin. She said sometimes he would go down the streets there, shadow boxing and sort of doing little...
Yeah, I imagine that's more or less exaggerated. Howard was a little on the odd side.
He wasn't an animal. There were very many people. He was rather a loof.
But he was a big robust man. To me, he was a combination of Edgar Allen Poe and Jack London.
If you can imagine that two together.
Yeah, he had those books in his library, so I can imagine that pretty well.
Well, he was very robust like Jack London.
He was a majestist like Poe.
And once he wrote a few poems, maybe you're familiar with one called The Temptress.
The Temptress. He wrote a very good... It reminds you of Poe's Raven, something, the meter of it, something like that.
In that he compares that The Temptress is a beautiful maiden who lures him. Her name is Suicide.
Yeah, I do believe I have read that one.
Yeah, I'm sure you've read it.
Yeah. Were there any people in Cross Plains aware that Howard was a writer?
No, they all knew it. I published in the newspaper, you know, once in a while.
I'd say Robert Howard had a story this week and Weird Tales or some of those pop magazines. Yeah, they knew it.
Yeah, yeah, I take it being a small town, I guess, just about everybody knew everything else.
Oh, yeah, that's right.
And his daddy was a doctor here, a country doctor, a general practitioner, well thought of, very popular.
And his father was proud of the fact that his son was a gifted writer.
He talked about it.
Yeah. Well, let's see. I'm about to run through my gambit of questions here.
Is there anything, any particular stories you know about Mr. Howard being that you were a newspaper man and everything?
He might have had some exploits out there.
I remember the morning he killed himself very well.
It was, I can't think of this one it was. I know it was a warm season of the year, it must have been summer.
But anyway, early in the summer, 10, 11 o'clock in the morning, I heard on the street that Robert Howard had just shot himself.
And I immediately jumped in my car and ran down there and got down there and a few neighbors had gathered.
It wasn't generally known over town, but the old justice of the peace was standing there on the, on the gallery, the front porch.
And when I walked up, he called and said, come here Jack.
And I stepped up there and he took me into the bedroom and he pointed to an old Underwood typewriter.
He had the four lines written on it there.
And Howard had, when he had been told that his mother wouldn't, wouldn't live throughout the day,
he went to this top right, wrote these four lines, walked outside, sat down his car and shot his head off.
And this old J.P. asked me what these four lines meant.
They said, I'm sure you've read them all, flat all done.
So let me own the tire. The feast is over. The lamps expire.
Yeah, we had read that.
I'm sure you've read that.
To me, I've been told since then by Sprayk the Kemp that the lines are not entirely original,
but they were certainly original as far as I'd ever heard or anybody else I've ever talked to except Sprayk the Kemp.
Yeah, I imagine that was Howard's way of putting it.
Yeah, that was his mother, the crazy. His finale.
Well, Mr. Scott, I can't think of anything else. Can you think of any other bold thing?
I'll tell you, you've got a son of Aaron Odessa. I'll tell you, a young man there, an Odessa,
you can pick up on the telephone and call him and knew him.
I'm Howard.
Have you talked to CS4?
No, sir. We talked to Jack Scott.
Yeah, I know Jack.
They're in cross planes and he referred us to you and your brother.
And what we're mainly just looking for are just some, oh, some interesting stories or any reminiscences you might have about Mr. Howard.
Well, yes, I'd be glad to tell you what I know about him.
I kind of think of some of the things that happened.
He was an unusual fella. I know that.
And have you read some of his stories?
Yes, I have. What type of person was he?
Well, he was kind of a loner.
And I'll just recount one instance. I don't think he ever went with a girl at all.
But he wrote some pretty outstanding stories.
Well, as I say in the, I recall some of the stories he wrote when he was in high school.
And they were really outstanding, but he never did.
He really wasn't in our group. He was kind of an outsider yet. He was readily accepted.
But I remember one time we were having a party and I was running in the little rental store there in the cross planes.
And we were having a party upstairs and Robert came and we were drinking some beer, some choc beer or something.
And I was way back before prohibition, you know.
And I know he got very upset about it. He got a little bit tired.
And he said that he'd kill anybody that interfered with his hands.
If his hands ever got damaged by somebody else, then he'd kill them.
Hello?
Yes, sir.
And that was just kind of the kind of fellow he was, kind of morose.
And he thought he had a real bright future in the head of him. He's a writer.
And I don't think I ever saw him after that until I heard he had committed suicide, didn't he?
Yes, sir, he did. He did. In 1936.
I knew his father real well. I didn't know his mother much. I know he was an only child, I believe.
And he never did enter into any of our activities as much as I remember.
So I don't really know what I could say to you that would help you.
Well, what you've already told us is quite a bit of help. Why do you suppose he was such a loner?
Being in friends from such a small town and usually everybody, you know, does things so much together?
I don't know. I don't know. He just, he could have been a great author, I think.
He had a, I don't remember even what kind of grades he made academically.
I know I took an ID he had for a story and tried to write a theme on it.
And he had already turned it to me. And I got in big trouble there, you know, trying to steal his ID.
And that kind of, I never did try that anymore again.
But I know he could tell a story that might really, this was something about a bear who got up in the attic or something
and broke through and disturbed some poker players.
But then I really can't tell you very much about Robert.
I'm thinking of it. There's another writer, C.S. Boyles. I don't know if you ever heard of him or not.
No, sir?
Out of town. Jack's cop didn't mention C.S.
No, I don't believe so, no.
What Jack tells you about him?
Mostly he had worked a little bit for Jack on the newspaper and Jack talked about what type of person he was, or the vigorous man, although he kept to himself quite a bit.
I wish I could recall more about that party, but I know he scared the hell out of all of us, because he got really excited and always trying to damage his writing career or something, getting him full of beer.
I don't recall exactly what, but anyway, he said he'd kill anybody that damaged his hands in any way.
I seem like I remember that pretty vividly. I don't know, maybe something happened there with his hands. Maybe we got him wracking a match or something. I don't know.
But anyway, he wanted to write with his hands.
That's very interesting. You don't happen to write like any other things that you might have done with Howard back when we were living in Crossroads.
Well, like I say, he wasn't in our group. We went fishing and we went swimming in the bow there and we hunted quail, but he was never one of us.
And how he happened to be in this deal, I don't know, I don't think he ever had the date with a girl.
He was a nice looking guy, very presentable and tall and well made.
And even if I talk to you, I can't really tell you anything much that I remember about him, except that I remember him being a very outstanding, that he would have been a great writer, I think.
Listen, what you've told me so far has been quite helpful. We're putting together bits and pieces of people who did know him, along with some research that some other people have done.
And I'd like to go ahead and put your recollections of that party and some of the other things you said into our program.
Well, that's authentic, but I can't quite recall the details of what happened to his hands. Maybe we were arm wrestling or something, I don't know.
But he got very uptight about what might happen to one of his hands or his arms or something.
I guess that was the only time he ever had a drink of beer in his life.
It sounded like what I was talking to some other people, that he might have been insecure.
Well, I think so. He was an only child, I don't know how close he was with his mother, but I don't think his father had anything to do with him.
It was my kind of feeling, I don't know.
Dr. Harrod was a real fine man, though, and I don't know how close they were together, but I think that he worshipped his mother. It was my impression in those years.
I don't know whether she died first or not, do you?
She had gone into a coma and was not expected to recover.
Oh, well now that's the reason for this suicide. Because he worshipped her. I know I can almost be sure of that, that he worshipped his mother.
And I know that her condition affects him very much.
And I know that he was afraid that something would happen that he couldn't write anymore.
Whether it was in his mind or in his fear that something would happen to his hands.
But that's the instance that I recall more vividly than anything else, and I've often thought of it.
I certainly do appreciate your talking with me.
And I believe that he could have strangled me to death there.
I don't recall whether it was me or somebody else, but it seems to me like his anger was supporting me.
But I know he's frightened the hell out of me.
He was a very big and strong fellow.
Yes, very strong. Could have twisted your neck off.
Much like the heroes that he wrote about.
If you give me your address, I'll send you a release form. What that does is simply you give us permission to use what I've been taping.
Oh, well, that doesn't matter to me. I don't care whether you use it or not. I'm just trying to be honest with you.
I have no hold on it. You can quote me any way you want to.
As I say, it's been a long time ago, but those are my recollections and I've often thought of it.
I've made a real strong impression on these that I was in real danger there.
Fortunately, you made it through it.
Other things have happened to me that I guess are almost dangerous, but anyway, that's it.
That's what I remember about Robert.
Truth all at with no problems, apparently.
And no attachments that I know of to anybody except...